So as I started as a scholar, I mean I was always addicted to literature, but I started as a scholar and then I developed into what I am now.
So this is perhaps not so surprising, but I always liked what is
what is tough, you know, what is difficult.
I wrote, Dankeschön, this looks good.
Enjoy.
That's interesting, you have scholars come to do work with the material.
Nearly every two weeks, we have scholars from Paris, from the United States.
In this summer, we had three scholars from the United States.
Now, tell me about that, your attitude on that.
That's very important.
Well, you know, they want to see books, especially manuscripts, in my possession.
For instance, Professor Meredith Tilbury McMunn came...
to see a Roman de la Rose manuscript in my possession because she's writing a census of all extant copies of the Roman de la Rose manuscripts, illustrated Roman de la Rose manuscripts.
Elizabeth Buren came to see my Lyonnais, so my manuscripts from Lyons in the 15th century and so on and so on.
within two weeks Akiko Komada from Paris will come to see my Biblio historial manuscript and so on.
So if not from time to time I decline one of those demands, I could just entertain scholars from all over the world at the Bibelmühle.
And as news have spread,
that it's nice at the Bibermühle.
So, these demands are more and more frequent.
Well, I'm sure you consider the merits of the request, too.
I mean, the scholarly interest of the... Of course.
Of course.
No, no.
For me, this is also the reason for me to give manuscripts and books to exhibitions.
I mean, nearly...
Every two months I get the demand from a library that they want one or two or many manuscripts from me for an exhibition.
Even the Morgan Library, who obviously does not need any manuscript, but they want for an exhibition in one or two years about Jean Poirier, the leading French book illuminator, around 1500.
They want two manuscripts from me because there's only 11 or 12 existing manuscripts by Jean Poet and I possess two of them.
So today I have sent to the librarian of the Bibliothèque Royale in Brussels photographs, color transparencies,
of two manuscripts of mine which they use for the catalogue and then they get two manuscripts for their exhibition of Willem Breland.
He was the code painter to Philip the Good of Burgundy and which will take place in December and January this year and the next year.
So they want two manuscripts of me.
I mean, I'm the only private person to whom they
turn for these things you mentioned earlier that how many manuscripts are there in private hands no no not in private hands I mean one has to be quite correct in the market in the market there are between 220 and 250 manuscripts of course in private hands available for private yes yes I understood that I'm sorry
in private hands there are fortunately thousands thousands of them still thousands but most of them are in old noble collections or so and will never be sold as I say one never knows do one yeah but if they are sold as for instance
the manuscripts of Holcomb Hall, the Earl of Leicester, then they are sold to the Bodleian Library or to the British Library.
Of course, they won't be sold to any private individual or to any dealer.
Do you ever feel that certain things belong in an institutional collection?
Yes, of course.
I mean, this is without a doubt the case with...
monuments I mean the Lindisfarne Gospels or the Book of Kells or the Nibelungenlied in Germany or the Chanson de Roland this belongs to great institutional preferably national libraries of course but what for instance the French do with their
understanding of the patrimony this is really too much really I mean it is nearly impossible for me to buy any important French manuscript from France officially I have to say that because one has to submit it to the Bibliothèque Nationale and
Last year I tried to buy a very important salter and I had already paid 3 million French francs for it.
And then, before collecting this manuscript, I got a letter from the Ministre de la Culture, Mr. Toubon, telling that they had now found that this manuscript is a historical monument.
and then that they had put three years export defense on it.
So I could not export it for three years.
And in this way they forced me to sell it to Metz, to the university library of Metz, because they said he won't be able to
to leave this here for three years and perhaps even incur a risk of not having it available for another five years.
So I sold it at cost price to the library of maths.
And it was just, how do you call it, ransom?
I'm amazed they came up with three million francs though.
well after six months or so and and with the help of the of the commune lorraine and and of they made it a course that was just wonderful that was just wonderful
So the French are the only people who just dare to do that.
Why do you think?
They have a different understanding of the role of the state.
I mean, the English or the German or the United States, they refrain
themselves and also the state refrains itself to the really essential things but the French try to to do everything you know and try to to cover everything and so I'm please don't write this but so I'm I'm forced to
to smuggle out manuscripts.
Really, I mean, because otherwise... Or I tell them, you have to bring it to Switzerland.
I buy it in Switzerland.
Well, that's not illegal.
No, it's not illegal, but I mean, I would prefer to do it legally, you know?
I mean, buy it in Paris or buy it in... Don't do it out front, as they say, without having to... Yeah.
To reduce yourself to... Yeah, yeah.
Deception, I guess, is the word.
But France is the only country in which I am forced to do these things.
The only country.
But one has to say that they have, of course, lots of verified things and of unheard things still around France.
In private hands.
Next year I shall be attending the Biennale because they invited me.
They invited me for six years now.
But I always feared being there for three weeks from 11 in the morning to 11 in the night.
practically alone, because my secretary in Germany doesn't speak French, and Mr. Cordes, who collected you at the station, doesn't speak French either.
And Helga, my wife, can't accompany me for more than two or three days.
So I always feared that, but I think I have to do that, because the French, on the other hand, they are the most book-loving people in the world.
They are.
They really are.
And I always wanted to be one of them.
And perhaps that combination, you know, of French...
sense of bibliophilia and of a certain German matter of factness has helped me, perhaps.
Would you say that your clients are all over the world?
Any place in particular where they tend to predominate?
Yes, but Europe predominates, by far.
Interestingly, I never found
a decent entrance to the American market.
But this depends, I mean, it's my fault.
It depends on my being somewhat shy against American people, you know.
I mean, I see lots of them at Maastricht and at the great TFA fair or at Basel or in Munich or wherever I am.
I have some difficulties with the American people and it is not surprising that the two or three people in America with whom I have more closer relationships they are former Europeans so I'm really a bit
I'm a bit sad about that because America or the United States, it's really, it could be the promised land for also this vision of book culture that we too discussed.
It could be the promised land for that because there are
hundreds of thousands of people who are waiting for this.
This was one of my reasons to welcome your letter.
The first, second that I...
received it because I really think that one has to do that and in the most pertinent way in the most pertinent manner and then perhaps this great land will in the one percent that really is
is responsible for the tendencies and for the trends and so on, then it could really be leading in the world, also in this field.
Until now, I think that Europe is still holding its... And within Europe, of course, it's all over.
Western Europe, I would think.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
And also Eastern Europe.
But Eastern Europe, you know, is still suffering, still very much suffering from the communism.
And they are just recovering now.
It will take another 10 or 15 years.
Even France has, what, 10% unemployment?
Yeah.
They don't like to talk about how much they're spending on this or that.
No.
I mean, the Germans are entirely different.
Of course, they have the notification.
Yeah, of course.
I mean, you know, without having taken in the whole of East Germany, I mean, the wine is good.
You know, this is really, I mean, this is one of the four or five greatest Burgundy wines in the world.
Claude La Roche.
And when I discovered that, I bought everything that could be had in Switzerland from this winery distributor.
Straight from the winery?
Yeah.
Any particular year or...
Well, this is 1991 and this is perfect now.
You know, it's not a great year.
1990 was a great year, but 1990 you can only drink in 2005.
So we want it now.
So 1991 is just perfect now as you smell and feel and taste.
Well, yes.
I just...
Today I received a demand from a librarian at Duke University who wanted to... John Sharp?
Yeah, John Sharp.
John Sharp's in my book.
Really?
He's in the Bloomberg chapter, the book.
Today he sent me his references and so on because he wants to work for me.
Really?
In America.
What do you think of him?
A lot of integrity.
He's an interesting man.
Yeah.
He wrote a very good description on that Synaxarion.
Read what he has to say in my book.
I quote him at length.
He's in the index.
John Sharp.
In fact, when I give my talks, I usually mention
an incident that happened with him and the book thief.
The book thief went up to him and confronted him.
And it's a funny story.
I mean, you'll read it in the book.
No, no, no, I read it.
That's John Sharp.
That's John Sharp III at Duke University.
He wants to leave Duke University and he wants to work for me.
He has a fine reputation.
I can't say I know him well.
No, no, but I heard that.
But also a man of integrity, and that counts for a lot.
It's your couple.
I mean...
Well, I meet him.
Oh, by the way, will you be at that inauguration at the Morgan Library at the 20th of October?
I shall be there.
They invited me because I'm a fellow of the Morgan Library.
And there's also that exhibition of medieval bestsellers.
I'll try to make it down.
I don't know about it.
This was one of the most interesting, most important, most revealing points about these.
No, this was really a fine piece of detective work, really.
I have said...
before the book came out, I said, this chapter will cause people to read this book a hundred years from now.
Yeah, exactly.
Because this is unique in the history of book collecting, and it's certainly unique to the 1980s and to this part of it.
And to discover the very simple and even more.
I bought the Dante first edition.
You bought the Dante?
Yeah, and these things.
I bought Wolfram von Eschenbach and these things.
You want some cheese?
I'd like a little coffee I think would be good.
And a sort of dessert.
Something light.
So I was there.
I came there.
for the first time of my life to the United States.
That's your first trip?
It was my first trip, yeah.
And I had bad luck because my Concorde from Paris came to New York in time, but the JFK was foggy, so we had to go to Boston.
On the Concorde, that never happened.
On the Concorde, and in Boston they were...
practically not allowed to land there.
But we landed there and we stayed there for two hours and then we started again.
And then I was in New York after eight hours after I left Paris instead of two and a half.
And I wanted to inspect the books, I wanted to see the books.
And it was the very day of the sale because I'm always doing this.
Either I do it on telephone or I come the very day of the sale and see the most important books and then I make my decisions.
So I was not able to see any book.
This was a pity because though I was the underbidder on say 30 or 40 of the most important books,
I only managed to buy, well, 15 to 20 books, but some very important.
The Juditio Principes of Dante, as I said, and Wolfram von Eschenbach, Parzival, and Titerell, and so on.
And I also bought the Rilke Manuscript, which will be in my next catalog.
So you still have that?
Yeah, and I bought the Eschenlin Dante on Vellum,
and so on.
So I bought the whole range from the 15th to the 20th century but as I was not able to collate and to see the books I was perhaps not so courageous as I would have been
had I landed there in time, you know, and seen the stuff in Boston.
For those kinds of numbers you have to know what you're doing.
Yeah, of course.
I bought for about two million dollars or so.
The Cervantes shocked everybody.
Yes, but I know this story, you know, but I won't tell you.
But I know these stories, the Shakespeare and the Cervantes, these are, these are, these are mean stories, I have to tell you.
I'll turn off the tape recorder, I'd love it.
No, no, yeah, no, but I have to tell you that this sale, it was a very important, it was a very important sale.
Though in two deals I made a huge figure than the whole sale.
But nevertheless it was a very important sale.
But what I have to say is that many of my colleagues, many of my fellow dealers really tried to make most of the sale
on detriment of their clients.
It's a pity to say that.
And I know so many things of these and this is why prices went through the roof.
They just went wild because there was one client of mine who
first of all because he knew that I would never go to the United States, entrusted his bids to two other world leading firms.
Won't tell you.
Well, Quaritch bought everything.
Yeah, Quaritch and one other American firm.
And then I told... But they had their class.
Cross about a lot.
Cross, yeah.
So...
But then I told him, I will be there.
And then the evening before the sale, he changed his mind and wanted to give me all his bids.
And I said to him, well, you know, as you know, I don't take any commissions, but for you, I would take them.
You don't take commissions?
Normally I don't take commissions.
I want to buy the books and I want to make... Let the books take care of themselves.
So you're really not, you're buying for yourself.
I'm always, 99.9%, I'm buying for myself.
I'm buying for stock.
We haven't said that before.
No, no, well, I mean, there are many things that I haven't said before.
That's very interesting, you see.
I'm never buying for others.
Of course, there aren't many booksellers who can afford to do that.
I'm perhaps the only bookseller in the world who is always buying for himself.
and who is not buying together in a consortium.
So I told him, in this very special case, I accept your commissions.
And he said, OK, I just have to tell this one and this one that you get the commissions.
And they went furious, of course.
They went wild when they heard that, because these commissions were the most substantial of all.
among two or three most substantive feminists.
And so they really frightened him.
And I said, well, let them have it.
You just tell me what you want to have.
And in the cases that I do not want books, they shall have it.
Otherwise, I try to get them.
I told him, frankly.
And so I got the gun tail and other things that he also wanted to have.
But I afterwards learned what they had done.
I mean, this is really, I mean, it is not worth of the renown of such films.
Really, it's not worth.
I mean, they told Sotheby's, we have commissions up to that.
point up to that... The reserve?
No, no, no.
Ten times the reserve or so.
Just see to that.
We do not get it much below that.
I mean, this is... Well, the sail was very heated and it was a boiling affair and the taxi driver, because it was the very day that the Berlin Wall
was falling, you know.
He said to me, what the hell are you doing here?
Because he heard that I was talking German to my friend.
And all in all, it was just an overwhelming thing.
But what the most serious and the most renowned of my colleagues have done at this sale, this is really appalling, to say the least.
another temptation another temptation yeah yeah yeah so there's your espresso thank you you know I think it's always I think it's always interesting to to see it from from a different side see it from the other side the same thing you just told me nobody would ever have told me before no of course not of course not because
Because it's not what we call a rumusblatt, you know, a piece of honor.
Why would they do that, just to get a higher commission?
Of course.
But it depends on the fact that most of these antiquarian booksellers live on commissions.
They don't buy anything for themselves, only if they get it at a fraction, at the value of the thing.
But how can they still manage to run up the price stock, unless it's a conspiracy between two dealers?
How can they manage to spend... If you tell Sotheby's we have a commission up to that sum... So he'll see a bid when there maybe isn't one there?
Let's imagine one item.
The item is estimated at $100,000.
a bid from a client up to $450,000.
You just tell it in the bosom of Sotheby's.
You just place it in the bosom of Sotheby's.
And you say, well, we have a very substantial bid.
And they say, well, very substantial.
Over our estimate.
Well, four times our estimate.
So you can swear
that Sotheby's will just bid you against the chandelier, you know, up to $380,000.
If they know, why not?
I know they did that in the Dick Manning sale.
Yeah, in the Manning sale, of course.
When the Shakespeare's came up, there was nobody in the form.
No one, no one.
He finally bought it in for $600,000, and I'm standing there, I happen to be standing next to Stephen Massey, and I said, who the hell is bidding?
I said, who's bidding?
He says, do you see?
Of course, he's Christie's, and this is Sotheby's.
He says, do you see anybody bidding?
I said, no.
He said, well, that's because there isn't anybody bidding.
He said, that's the answer right there.
But they certainly couldn't let the thing be bought in for $500,000 when they put a million and a half on it.
No, they do that.
But talking of Christie's, I mean, they wanted me to buy that Blonde Chronique printed on vellum,
four years ago and I was the only I was the only client to buy such a thing for say half a million pounds or so and that you bought for stock too no I went there and I said well you know it's times are hard it's 1993 and they were hard I have to tell you
In 1993, I lost my three best customers.
All three within three months.
My best customers.
Diseased?
You mean they died?
Well, one died of suicide.
The other went to prison on tax reasons.
And the third one got troubles with the bank.
This Alsatian Tarte Tatin is really good.
So, I went to Felix Hoyens and said, I'd like to have that.
What is the reserve?
And he said, well, the reserve, initially we thought the reserve is 300,000 pounds, but now
The reserve has been up to £500,000.
Yeah, £450,000.
And I said, okay, help me.
Not that I'm very short of money, but I would like to get some terms.
I'm thinking of six months or so.
30, 60, 90, 120 and so on.
Up to 180.
And he said, okay, okay, come with me to my office and we just sign a thing that you get by buying it above 450,000 pounds that you get payment terms over six months.
And I said, okay.
And then the day of the sale, next day came and I was there and I was the only one to bid from £250,000 on.
And I said to myself, what am I doing here?
Who are you bidding against?
Only against the chandelier.
So did you pull out at some point?
No.
I went up to £450,000.
And then...
See, that's nasty, isn't it?
It is more than nasty.
It's criminal, actually.
Of course.
But wait.
And then Lord Hindlip, you know, he tried another $460,000, and then I let them stay there.
And he said, $462,000.
And I said, no, no, thank you.
That's it, you backed up.
So it went back.
But they were lucky they got somebody to come in, though.
What would they have done if you let it go?
They just... They would have... They would have said, bought it in.
Yeah, of course.
And, and, um, Predix Orian did not believe his ears when he, when he heard, uh, Hindlip say 460.
Because I, I went up to my, to my limit, you know, up to my, uh, optimum, maximum.
So you, you impose limits on yourself?
Yeah.
And, uh,
Well, afterwards I was quite delighted because normally I should have had it at 250,000 or so.
They played games.
Yeah, but not with me, you know.
I mean, I went through hundreds, literally hundreds of options in the last 20 years, perhaps thousands.
No one will play games with me.
No one.
I mean I bought the Biblia pauperum in 1986 and I was chased up by two not so honest people whom I know by name.
But I mean one learns.
Today
I normally do not even go to the auction sales.
Either I'm there via the telephone or I send someone there so that no one knows that it's me behind this one.
This is good because sometimes I get the books at
half the price that I would have to pay if I'm there in person.
Because I'm sure that there are people who will run you up just out of spite.
Of course, of course, of course, because if they say that I'm, if they see that I'm bidding, they just say to themselves, well, there must be something behind, and let's try, or let's just keep something.
No, I think at your level,
It doesn't do you any good to go in?
No, no, no.
So I haven't been to the London sales in the last three years for more than two or three times.
I was at the back sale because I was... You could go with an associate and have the associate bid for you.
Of course.
No, no, this is no problem.
And do you have a paddle number at all these places?
Well, normally I don't have a pedal number because they all know me.
But now they want all of us to have also a pedal number.
I, of course, have a pedal number.
And if I buy more at sales, they say, may I have your pedal number?
But normally it's just my name.
As I told you, I'm fortunate enough to get most of the important things offered privately.
And this is really... It's cleaner, it's neater.
Yeah, of course.
Because as you see, I mean, as with the garden sale or with other sales, I mean, I could tell you stories about nearly every important sale in the last 10 or 15 years.
And...
And most of the stories are not so very proper.
We have time, I think.
Do you realize we've already got three hours of tape and we haven't even done tomorrow yet?
That's great.
The more the better.
Believe me, it's magnificent stuff.
I think it's good to have as much stuff as possible.
Pardon me for calling it stuff, but it's material.
And I transcribe these things.
Really, of course.
You really have to do that, because one cannot keep that in mind.
And I do it myself.
You know how you do your catalogs?
I could hire somebody to do the transcripts.
No, no, one has to do it oneself.
Because you hear it yourself, there are nuances that you...
that you're never going to pick up.
And then you're able to hear it again too.
Wonderful.
I think that in a certain way we have gotten back a sort of predominance in the antiquarian book selling and book dealing.
from the United States, because in the 60s and in the 70s, and even in the 80s, the United States were predominant.
They were overwhelming.
I mean, LDF, Lou David Feldman, who I worry about, H.P.
Krauss and Breslauer, though he's, of course, he's a German Jew, too.
turned english and then he went in the early 70s he went to new york they were a real force in the field and there were not many to to even try to fight against them let alone to
In your view, in your mind, is there a tradition of European book selling, which kind of brings a scholarly vent?
Yes, that exists, really.
It's something I'm trying to get at.
Yeah, but I'm sorry to say this.
It is not the
Anglo-Saxon tradition, it is more the French and the German tradition.
The German tradition was always a tradition of scholarly confidence.
I mean Jacques Rosenthal or Leo Baer or Carl Hirseman, those were very important scholarly trained booksellers in the great tradition.
and they made the best catalogs and they established the most lasting traditions in the first half of the 20th century.
Jack Rosenthal and his elder brother Ludwig Rosenthal and Emil Hirsch and Carl Hirseman, Martin Breslauer, the father of Bernard Breslauer and Leo Baer
But most of them were Jewish, you know.
And so in the 30s they came to the United States.
Nearly everyone came either to the United States or to England or they died as Jacques Rosenthal.
And they even did not, the Nazi did not dare to touch him, you know, because he was world famous, Jacques Rosenthal.
So he died in 1936.
I'm seeing Edith Rosenthal next week in Amsterdam, and she's going to tell me about that.
And I've already talked to Bernie.
Well, Bernie, you know, wrote about the... Of course, about the family, the emigrant books, and so on, because the Rosenthal were also married to the Olskis and so on.
Well, this may be a fascinating story.
and really I see that this German tradition in a certain way I'm trying to keep up because you know what they did in their time we tried to do in our time with a much more scholarly impact but what they did in their time was well it was
the most that they could do.
Do you know Roger Stoddard at Harvard?
No, I never met him, but of course I know his name.
He's of the opinion that so many of these Jewish booksellers who left
really affected the whole flow of books for a generation.
Without any doubt, Nicholas, without any doubt.
I mean, really it was the Jewish booksellers who did that.
If you were to look at the experiences of at least 50 or 40 or 50 booksellers who came really with their knowledge.
By the way, I mean quarry.
Max.
These all were Jewish of origin.
They were German, but they were Jewish.
And what we are trying now is to keep up with that tradition.
In fact, Roger does believe, though, that primarily led by yourself, that the German tradition has reversed.
Of course.
And that you are, once again, preeminent
Oh, by me, no.
Well, I mean, in terms of doing significant things?
Yeah, I wanted to do that, you know.
I wanted to pick up a tradition forgotten for 50 or 60 years.
Because, you know, after the Second World War, no one in Germany was dealing in manuscripts.
No one.
In 1983 or 1982, I was the first to pick up that thread.
Really?
No, that had been laid by the Rosenthal's and by Leo Baer.
I was the first.
Of course, there were manuscripts, but invariably they were picked up by Krauss and so on.
Ja, hallo, mein lieber.
Ich höre, Sie sind krank.
Ja, du, mein lieber.
Was?
Jewish, I mean, but it was always my intention to pick up that thread that, as I said, was falling in the early 30s, because virtually the great German antiquarian booksellers were 90 to 95% of Jewish origin, though there were
assimilated Jews but they were Jewish and so they had to leave.
And of course many of the second or third-rate librarians took over and made the most of it and took their profit from this.
But in the 50s, 60s and 70s the antiquarian book trade in Germany suffered
still from that loss and even in the 80s they did not recover and then I tried to maintain the tradition of haute bibliophilie you must have perceived an opportunity yes there was no one there I did I did or I at least hoped that there was this opportunity you know and in a certain way I succeeded also in this field
Meanwhile, there are two or three booksellers in Europe who try to follow these paths.
I think it's good to do this.
Do you see any competition to yourself out there?
Well, of course there are competitors, but I don't see any serious competition.
because I mean most of my fellows they have ten or fifteen manuscripts and most of them belong to three or four or five parties you know and they make the tour of the catalogs of the four or five or six and they belong to six or seven parties.
Which brings me to an interesting question and I hope it's not
you take it in the spirit within which it's asked, but how important is capital in this equation?
Well, I mean, yeah, this is a good question.
I have two good bankers, you know, because sometimes, even if you're just on the point of publishing a new catalogue, after which you sell lots or at least some of the things and have the capital again,
If you are offered in this situation a very important thing, you have to buy it, of course.
And to go to your banker and say, well, I need another two or three million Swiss francs or two or three million Deutsche Mark.
If they are not very sympathetic with what you do, you don't get the money, of course.
But do you have to explain to them in bibliographical terms the significance of it?
No, no, no, no.
I persuaded them in banker terms, you know, because I never told them what I could not make true, you know.
I mean, I never told them anything that did not arrive in time, you know.
I told them, I shall get this and this, then and then.
And it always... Yeah, but then you do buy things that you've had for ten years.
Well, but I mean, this is of course a part of my success, that these things do not cost me...
at all, you know, because I made the profit on other things.
And if I now sell a book bought ten years ago for say one million dollars or so, well this is my profit, this is sheer profit because I made the money I needed for that.
So you have to imagine that
of all my books and of all my manuscripts only say, well, 8% belong to my bank.
This is okay because in the art trade, I have to tell you, it is ordinary that 50% or 60% or even 70% belong to your bank.
and with me it's only below 10% and as you said you have to have a good opinion and they know that everything is true what I say to them you know and having having having seen and having recognized this for 20 years now or for 15 years here they know that I'm never lying that
I will never lie to them.
Of course, I mean, yes, but... No, no, no.
I'm very cautious.
I'm very cautious, you know.
Because I know if one time something that I tell them will not be... will be belied by the time...
they say, well, this can happen.
But the second time, they will cancel parts of my credit.
And this, I can't afford this.
And it never happened.
And even in the most difficult times, the times in 1993, 1994, they were really difficult, not only for me, for all of us.
But for me, especially because I
had bought the Bibermühle and two large libraries and so on and so on, and we were talking of tens and tens and tens of millions of dollars, even then they stuck to me.
I'm very grateful to them.
And so they are to me.
Okay, Nicholas.
What keeps you going?
This tension of the things lying in the future and maybe present tomorrow or in a week or so that I may discover in a month things that you would have thought burnt in the Second World War or
gone to international libraries since a hundred years or so all these discoveries and all these hopes are what make my profession the finest the most beautiful and the most promising profession in the world and you make these discoveries you're invited into a house and you're invited to look at things yeah and nobody even do they give you an idea of what's there are you just
Well, no, no, no, no, no.
Most of the times, either they know nothing at all, or they know exactly what they have.
Normally, if they know nothing at all, I come to their house and I tell them, and I run the risk that after they have discovered that things are worth a hundred times more than they have thought they were,
that they go to solubries or to christmas but normally they don't because they think that I'm honest and in 80 or 90 percent I then get them or they know exactly what they have and then come with me you know they come to me and offer me their things and then disappointments are inevitable because to know what you have and to evaluate
this item or these items exactly is a very different thing, of course.
And how often do you run into things that you had no idea existed before?
Well, does that happen?
Yes, that happens, say, eight to ten times a year.
But we are talking of very important things.
One could raise that to, say, 20 times a year.
And this is much for a one-person company like me.
And you are a one-person company.
I'm a one-person company.
Very modest staff, right?
Your wife works.
At this very moment, I don't even have a secretary.
Because, of course, to be my secretary, this is a sort of... It's not very easy.
And I had a 22-year-old girl as secretary from February on.
She was very handsome, but she had no...
gifts whatsoever so I had to it was really too bad but so for three months now we don't even have a secretary but it's okay and we are making our catalogs and perhaps the officials in the Kantor Schaffhausen wait a month longer for being for the taxes to be paid and so on but
Even that does not avoid the marching on of our business.
So you're really a one person?
Yes, one person.
As I told you, I have a scholarly advisor, Eberhard Koenig, professor at the Free University of Berlin.
who is a very good friend and who writes most of my manuscript catalogs.
But apart from that, I'm the only one who does all the work in the business because my wife is busy with our two children, 12 and 14 years old, and with those two modest houses that you have seen.
And you have an assistant, but he handles the... Well, I have an assistant who lives in Hamburg and who comes for one week a month to help me.
So, I mean, one cannot say that this is a regular employee.
But you have another operation.
You can't be two places at the same time.
Yeah, exactly.
And there's still Bavaria, my German company,
So this has to be, and there is also a secretary, and she is just perfect.
I mean, she's one of the most wonderful persons in the world, and without her, I would have stopped running that business in Germany for three or four years.
But she's really more than helpful.
She's my second, my right arm and my right leg, so to say.
It's amazing.
She's good and we like each other very much and the only thing that I really want to do is to bring her to Switzerland but as you know this is not so easy to get a German employee into my Swiss firm because the Swiss now are also
thinking of suffering of their unemployment they have I think 4.5% unemployment but still they think this is this is rather dramatic and so they